---
layout: narrative
title: "A return to journalling"
author: Molly White
publication-date: 2019-05-22
comments: true
custom_excerpt: "Inevitably, when I find myself taking another stab at finding a form of journaling that works for me, I spend an entry writing about how I want to write again, instead of just... starting to write. This is one of those entries."
---

I am a perennial journaller. Once or twice a year I find myself thinking about how nice it would be to let out some of the thoughts that swirl around my brain, and start picturing myself curled up in a blanket on the couch with a cup of tea, scratching away in my journal in some show of mindfulness and self-reflection. This urge burns out as I realize that I handwrite too slowly to keep up with my own brain, or that it is unfulfilling to type into a text document in a folder so unlikely to be opened again that it might as well be /dev/null. But inevitably, when I find myself taking another stab at finding a form of journaling that works for me, I spend an entry writing about how I want to write again, instead of just... starting to write.

This is one of those entries. Humor me.

For the past few months I have been in a patch of excellent mental health. Thinking about that sentence more closely, it's perhaps more accurate to say that I have recently come out of a long period (several years) of quite poor mental health. Saying I'm "in a patch" of good mental health makes it sound like this is the temporary state and the poor mental health is the norm to which I will soon return, but for various reasons I neither need nor want to detail here I don't believe that to be true.

As is often the case, I had not realized how poor my mental health had been until I finally had a stretch of normalcy. When my mental health is poor, the "essential" things I do in my day-to-day life—go to work, take basic care of myself and my pets, etc.—often feel like they take more energy than I have available. "Non-essential" things like cooking myself nice meals, going to social events, and doing hobbies that require more than the effort it takes to scroll mindlessly through a Reddit or Twitter feed become infrequent, since the "essential" tasks have already sapped my energy reserves. I use quotes here because "essential" is quite relative—going to work or brushing my teeth is not "essential" in a life or death kind of way, and cooking a meal is not "non-essential" in a frivolous way, but it's the best descriptor I can think of at the moment.

In this return to health, I have been able to gradually build back the routine of regularly doing things that are "non-essential". I have thoroughly cleaned my apartment every weekend for several months. I have filled the bird feeder every morning.[^fn1] I have packed my lunch for every in-office day since at least the beginning of May. I have bullet journaled almost every day. I am a creature of habit, and the more I build up these healthy, rewarding habits the better I feel, and the more bandwidth I generate for the things that previously were too exhausting to manage. I've been baking again, I went on a trip, I read a book. I am very proud of these things I've managed to build into my life, however small they may be, and the result that my life feels more put-together and fulfilling that it had for a long while.

The point of this somewhat meandering post is that one of the things I've been wanting to add to my newly-cultivated set of routines is writing. I've had a blog for a while, but only rarely used it—either to document a personal project I was working on (more commonplace before I began working fulltime), or if I had something I wanted to rant about in a longer form than Twitter allows. But I have seen some blogs and blog posts lately that I find really compelling—a sort of "personal newsletter" style of post. Some are even set up to arrive in subscribers' inboxes in true newsletter form, although I personally am not a big fan of that.

The newsletter-style post that planted the seed for me was one of Emily Gorcenski's [personal recaps](https://emilygorcenski.com/post/2019-weekly-recap-week-1/) where she shares books and articles she's read or is reading, her plans for the upcoming week, and a selfie. I like the idea of a regular post in which I can share the interesting things I come across in my travels on the internet (and my thoughts on those things), as well as other things I've been doing.

As is often the case, I decided I wanted to start my latest foray into journaling/blogging by yakshaving. Usually this takes the form of agonizing over and buying a fresh new notebook (when I have plenty of lightly-used notebooks already). In this case I've managed to convince myself that I need to write Yet Another Blogging Application (YABA?) before I can possibly begin blogging, even though only a month or two ago I spent a weekend moving my blog from Ghost to jekyll. I decided that I would at least write this introductory post before allowing myself to poke around in software-land, but stay tuned—if my interest remains, there may be some changes coming.

[^fn1]: For the wild birds, I do not have pet birds I've been starving to death.
